[[??Unknown speaker]] The Folklife Festival, as you may know, is produced by the Smithsonian Center for Folk Life and Cultural Heritage. Our co-sponsor is the National Park Service and we are very happy to be here on the National mall, using our--this wonderful site framed by the U.S. Capitol, Washington Monument, and Museums of the Smithsonian Institution.
The festival is supported in part by federal funds, by Smithsonian trust funds, by contributions from governments, corporations, foundations, and individuals like yourself.
One way you can help contribute is by visiting our festival marketplace, which is just to the west, in front of the National Museum of American History.
We've got beautiful craft items, made by our participants from China and from Kenya.
You can also visit, if you haven't already, our food concessions.
We have a food concession directly behind you called [[?? Chinese name]]
"Let's Eat," serving Mapo Tofu and dumplings Lo Mein, cucumber salad. And further to the east we have two food concessions, one from--one representing Kenyan coastal cuisine and one representing Kenyan uplands cuisine.
This particular program, China, Tradition, and the Art of Living, is produced by the Smithsonian Center for Folk Life and Cultural Heritage in partnership with the China International Culture Association, working with the China Arts and Entertainment Group.
Additional support is provided by the West Calhoun  Cultural District, the Hong Kong S.A.R. and the [[??Unknown name]] Provincial Department of Culture.
So, we're about to begin a session we're calling "Sweet and Sour: Chinese Food in America." And today, Sunday June 28th is our--sorry June 29th [laughs] is our Diaspora Day.
We're very fortunate to have the support of the Smithsonian Asian-Pacific American Center.
And representing the center is Adriel Luis, who is a curator of digital and emerging media, on the far left here.
And next to me is Cedric Yeh, who is the Deputy Chair for the division of Armed Forces History at the National Museum of American History.
But aside from their roles at the Smithsonian, they also have deeper connections to Chinese food, so maybe I'll ask each of them to introduce themselves and tell us, what is their connection to Chinese food. Maybe start with Adriel.
Hello everybody. Thank you for joining us today on Diaspora Day. My name is Adriel Luis.
I was born and raised in the Bay Area, California. My family is from Hong Kong, but our migration pattern kind of came through Mexico City.
My grandfather and great-grandfather moved there, owned a restaurant, and then eventually they moved up to San Francisco.
And then my grandfather owned a restaurant over there. And so, I kind of grew up eating really good Chinese food.
And then, I started working at Smithsonian about a year ago. Before that I was living in Beijing and that was actually the first time in, like, 3 or 4 generations that my family had actually resided in mainland China.
And so, it was just really interesting growing up eating what I thought was authentic Chinese food, and then actually getting a taste of it. And so, yeah--
And so Cederic, maybe tell us a little bit about your connections to Chinese food.
Good afternoon everybody. Thank you for coming out, on what's turned out to be a lovely Sunday afternoon. I was about to apologize for the D.C. heat, but it's not so bad.
As Jim mentioned, I'm curator in the Armed Forces History division because as we all know, the U.S. Army loves Chinese Food. [laughs] But, my direct connection is that I grew up in a Chinese restaurant.
You know, if you ever went to a take-out joint or something like that, you saw a little kid running around, inside and out and then around the tables. That was basically me.
And--Except I didn't know that there was a larger story to be told there. For me it was just home.
Recently I had the opportunity to begin long-range research into the history of Chinese food in America, to talk about broader issues of immigration, assimilation, and entrepreneurialship. And, that's led me here, today.
As we were preparing for this session, Cederic told me that there are more Chinese restaurants in the United States than there are McDonald's, Burger Kings, and Pizza Huts, combined.
So, the question is why is Chinese food so popular in the United States or around the world? How would--Who wants to address that first? Cederic?
It's a fascinating number I came across. It was one of the first things that got my interest. It's kind of an amazing number. The last time I checked the census, it was around 50,000.
If you're trying to figure out that number, everybody thinks there are Starbucks across the street from one another, two blocks away from one another. You wonder why there are so many.
There's only around 13,000 Starbucks in the world. Alright, that's just to give you an idea.
As for the question of why--you can have that many restaurants, that's been part of my study for the last 3 or 4 years. There's no direct answer why the popularity, but some of the idea is this: it's always been affordable, it's always been something that people could get a full meal--a whole, full meal for your family for $20.
It's always been, at least in the early stages, exotic. It gives people a sense that they're trying something from far away. But lately it's become something more predictable.
It's something that we all understand. If you're moving from one coast to the next, you don't have anything in your house, you know you can ring up the local Chinese place and you know what you can order.
It's pretty much the same. There's appetizers on the left, main courses in the middle, and then on the right side of the fold they're probably going to have some American dishes.
And you probably know what they are. So, it's reached a saturation point where everyone feels comfortable with it. And it helps generate its own form of momentum--forward momentum.
Adriel what are your thoughts on this? Why is Chinese food so popular, either in the United States, around the world, or perhaps--yeah, please.
You know I think a lot of people think about cuisine and restaurants coming from a consumer standpoint. I think one of the things about Chinese restaurants is that they're not always necessarily started by people who have a background in cuisine.
And so, when you think about immigration from China and people landing in and what are some entry-point businesses they can open up, the ones that kind of ended up sprouting up among Chinese communities were restaurants and laundromats.
And so, I think part of was almost--just being [[??Unknown word]] restaurants first and then at that point the availability kind of gets people to want to try it out.
You know, I mean, if you come to a city, and you've just got like a row of Chinese restaurants and you're hungry, then you're just going to try one out.
And so, when you think about the diaspora of Chinese people, especially in the United States, you can go to really small towns--I've been to college towns where you can pretty much find like, two dive bars and then like, a Chinese restaurant.
And, I think it's almost become a thing where--people in the US find it to be comfort food. You know, like [[?]] said if you can't find a chain-- I think Chinese cuisine is one of those things that there not necessarily connected to a chain.
But, you still have this common menu that you know when you get there, there's going to be certain dishes. And they happen to be dishes most of the time, that were invented in the US.
And so, I think part of it is also American Chinese cuisine is one of those cuisines that was formulated and that caters around an American palette specifically.
And then so, you have that kind of spread in the US and then as American culture spreads throughout the world part of that is the American Chinese cuisine.
Just as an aside, and keeping in tune with my armed forces history background-- as a little factoid-- being in D.C I meet a lot of foreign aid and military types.
The first two restaurants apparently in the green zone in Iraq were Chinese restaurants! So you know, they weren't American Chinese restaurants they were just--entrepreneurial Chinese families. But they probably heard that Americans like Chinese food.
Yeah as I mentioned, today at the folk-life festival is diaspora day. And one of the-- I think interesting trends about Chinese restaurants is that, you could almost use it as a timeline of immigration patterns.
So who would like to sort of talk about that? I mean how do Chinese restaurants-- those straight patterns of migration, immigration and diaspora.
Well, following what [[?]] just said about Chinese restaurants being one of the only means-- as a possibility of immigrants coming in this country. There's a story behind that there's a reason behind that, because when the earliest Chinese immigrants first arrived they came just like everyone else did, looking for an opportunity.
They started many different jobs, they were farmers, they were-- they worked on the railroads, they were miners. They had a lot of different professions but as time went on, the differences-- their otherness, the fact that they did not blend in well with the community.
They earned growing mistrust from the west coast communities, that eventually led to exclusion laws that barred more Chinese coming into the country and made it increasingly more difficult for them to do those normal jobs.
So, one of the few things they could do was restaurants or laundromats-- things that didn't infringe upon other community activities, that didn't feel threatening. I mean if you didn't want to eat their food you didn't have to go in there.
So,that's basically how that started and it continues to this day, because it's become a large part of-- the fabric of the American experience, in this countries eating habits is that when new Chinese immigrants come here. Even if they don't fit the bill, if they weren't in the restaurant business before they could be-- highly trained highly educated people who have not but know they're gonna end up working in a restaurant because that's what's available to them.
And the story follows, as you mentioned, a timeline that involves the end of the exclusionary laws around World War Two. What happened between there is a fascinating story and then of course, the next big spike is the 1965 immigration law changes. Revolutionized the ability for immigrants coming to this country from all over the world -- brought new tastes, new flavors, including some of the more popular dishes that you've probably heard from Szechuan and Hunan.
It's all pretty average now, but at the time it was unbelievable. Nobody had heard of this, it was just the influx of these new flavors, and that's around when my parents came to this country too, is during, right after the changes in those laws.
Yeah Adrio(?) do you want about this idea of migration, diaspora, and Chinese restaurants.
Yeah. We got like a soundtrack now, I feel like, so Chinese right now, talking with this. So, well, one of the interesting things about the popularity of Chinese restaurants is that, the history of Chinese food in America was so much the opposite of what it is now. Like, one of the tactics dur--  so, in the late 1800s, there was a Chinese expulsion era. Chinese people as an ethnicity, we're the only ethnicity where there was actually American legislation where there was a law that specifically was like, "We don't want Chinese here!" right. And around that was also a lot of propaganda, cultural propaganda. One of the things in the late 1800s was that, you know like, we don't want these Chinese people here, all they eat is rats, cats, and dogs.
Fortunately, those stereotypes no longer exist, right. And so, like, that was one of the reasons why Chinese restaurants in America were very insular. In the late 1800s, early 1900s, if you went into a Chinese restaurant, you would only see Chinese people there and the dishes were catering mostly just to Chinese folks, and so, even here in DC you would have Szechuan restaurants, Hunan restaurants, Hong Kong restaurants, and they all had their own distinct regional cuisines.
And then, you have President Grant, right. So the story of President Grant is, he had the Chinese Prime Minister over and the Prime Minister brought his personal chef. And so throughout the trip they're eating a bunch of American food, and then one day, you know they're like, "You know, you have your personal chef over, why don't you try cooking us some Chinese food to eat?" right.
And the chef is like, "I'm in DC, I'm not gonna find the ingredients to make some Chinese food" right. And so he just, like, put together a bunch of random ingredients and then served it to, like, the White House. And then they ate it and they're like, "Wow, this is delicious, what is it?"
And then the dude was like, "Uhhh chop suey" right. And then so, they're like "Wow!" and then, so like, word spreads, right. All the presses go out like, "Oh the President is eating Chinese food now" right.
And then, so, people all throughout DC started going to these Chinese restaurants like, "Hey, do you serve chop suey?" And then these restaurants owners, you know, for the first time are getting non-Chinese customers and they're not gonna be like, "No," so they're like, "Yeah, yeah, we make chop suey."
And so like you have all these different variations of chop suey spread throughout the US and so, you have these dishes like chop suey, egg foo young, beef and broccoli, sweet an--. Probably like most of your favorite stuff that you would get from like the hot plate thing at Panda Express. It comes out of this, similar stories where these Chinese entrepreneurs are kind of testing what are the different tastes that America, Americans are kinda going for.
And you have this negotation like Cedric was saying, you know like, what can we make so that people in America will be like really into it, but at the same time they'll feel like they're eating something all like, exotic right. And then so you end up with just like, meat covered in, gravy, which is very American when you come to think of it.
James Deutsch: Yeah, well the other, other part of chop suey and egg fiang is also fortune cookies, right? I mean fortune cookies are very popular in Chinese restaurants, do they have any relation to actual Chinese cuisine?
Cedric Yuh: Um yeah if you haven't heard yet I'm sorry to tell you, no. Um, haha.
Uh, fortune cookies are a wholly American invention, but, There are Asian influences. Um, I hesitate to use the word 'recent studies' but there is a lot of evidence that shows that the fortune cookie derived from a prefecture in Japan where they have a larger jumbo version of it, it's kind of like a big croissant.
The gentlemen who has a claim to creating it here in the States was from that prefecture and when he landed in San Francisco he wanted to have something to go along with tea in the afternoon, he had a teahouse, or at least he owned a restaurant in a tea- tea garden and so he made a smaller version of the fortune cookie.
Now the magic question is how does the fortune cookie end up as part of our expectations for an everyday Chinese meal if it was invented by a Japanese man.
Um, there's no real um, smoking gun. The idea of when it started being served in Chinese restaurants we don't really know.
How it started being the transfer from a Japanese creation to a Chinese one-- more than likely, the theory that I have, during World War II almost- every single Japanese American, or Japanese of American, uh-
Americans of Japanese ancestry were shipped off to internment camps. There were, it's a long story. But that meant that everything they had, their businesses their factories, gone- empty.
And the thought is that the Chinese then moved in, they're entrepreneurial, they started running the places keeping the businesses going and that led to the restaurants there were already beginning to boom.
Um, and then those were big ports, the war was going on, you have a lot of GIs from across the United States flooding through those areas, they stop for that little like,
"Hey there's a row of Chinese restaurants I'm gonna stop in, they gave me this fortune cookie, and amazingly, you know I don't know what you think about the taste of it but it's got a little fortune inside. You know oh my God who does that?"
And they go home to wherever they're from and they ask their local restaurant "where's my fortune cookie?" after they're done.
And they look at them and they say "I, I, I have no idea what you're talking about." Same thing with the chop suey and eventually people get it, you-- that's what you want, think about it it's free!
I mean what other restaurant ends your meal with - I guess you can get a mint or maybe like an orange wedge, but that's not the same thing. You get your fortune! My God.
Adriel Luis: Yeah I mean I think that - just to add onto that - like definitely when it comes to Chinese food in America it oftentimes really like comes less from a culinary, kind of like- you know food-based standpoint, and more of just like hustlers. Just being like what are people going to buy? What is going to make my business thrive, so a lot of Chinese food derives from an entrepreneurial standpoint, and then, as a result, Americans have become so accustomed to the taste that it just... People grow up eating it and wanting it.
Cedric Yuh: Not to knock our love of Chinese food. I don't want anybody to think that - I'll say it a different way: It's an interaction between those Chinese restaurant owners It was the only way of living, for a good 65 years. They had almost no choice but to open up restaurants and if that was your only job, then you're going to try and develop ways to interact with the community. That's the keyword: interact
They did not, as some people would say, I am not necessarily of the [[camp?]] that said that this is, um, that there's something less about Chinese food as we know it today because it's not authentic. I mean, it is very much American, I don't like to add any hyphens after it. They did not meet those immigrants when they came off the boat in 1850 and say "Give me all your recipes", and then for the next 100 years they messed them up, and then they gave them back recently and said, "Haha what are you going to do?". It was a constant interaction between the customers and the owners of those restaurants to create something that would sell, that you would enjoy and it's a part of all of our stories.
James Deutsch: For those of you who have just recently joined us, this is a session recalling sweet and sour Chinese food in America and with us are Cedric Yuh from the Smithsonian National Museum of American History and Adriel Luis from the Smithsonian Asian Pacific American Center. Adriel you were telling us, or you were telling me earlier, telling us earlier, that you recently lived in Beijing before coming to the Smithsonian and you've noticed that some of the restaurants in Beijing may be adapting or transforming based upon American style Chinese food. Could you share some of your thoughts about that with us?
Adriel Luis: Yeah so, um, so I, I was living in Beijing before I moved to DC and, um, I've had a harder time finding good Chinese food in DC than I had finding good food American food in China. uh, but, I was living, I was living in the third ring uh, in an area that is heavily ex-pat. Actually, when you look out the window there's like a pizza spot, a pasta spot, a brick oven pizza spot and like KFC. KFC is everywhere, hella KFC's right. And so, I had trouble finding Chinese food in my neighborhood actually, I had to hop on a train, kinda like in DC. But, you know, I think one of the interesting things, especially in these ex-pat areas, is that you have like this meta Chinese food, which is, because you have a lot of foreigners living in the neighborhoods that move to China and get freaked out by real Chinese food and they're like "Where my orange chicken?". They start cooking orange chicken up in China, right? And so you would go to these places where uh they would, they would serve the Chinese food that, you know, so, so typically like you would get a good meal in China of like real delicious clean Chinese food for like, maybe like, four or five bucks, uh, US dollars, but you would go into these really fancy restaurants they would sit you down and then uh, and then, and then you can order sweet and sour chicken for like fifteen US dollars, right, and uh, yeah it was like American style Chinese food uh, cooked by Chinese chefs who grew up cooking actual Chinese food and so it kinda tasted a little better than American Chinese food but at the same time it was weird yeah because you uh yeah you know you get your fortune cookie at the end, you know like they decorate it all like you know, with these lanterns and things like that, which you know, you actually don't get when you go to a local Bejing reustaruant, and so, it's, it's really interesting because I think on New York times they were writing an article about, now there these restaurants that are actually marketing themselves and ya know, you have these, now, now, you have these Americans, uh, moving to China because they spent some time living in China, uh now moving back to China, and then creating American-Chinese food, for Chinese people who want to eat like the ex-pats and so their going to these American-Chinese restaurants in China ordering American-Chinese food so that they can eat like the foreigners that they see eating it.
I recently gave an interview for the national china daily because--panda express is opening their first restaurant there, so that's fantastic! And another factoid, you know they tried marketing-- exporting fortune cookies back in the '80s but that failed miserably because no one understood why their cookies had species of paper inside. The locals were just confused and stopped buying them.
James Deutsch: Well, I'm sure members of our audience have questions they would like to ask our panelists. Yeah, Randy?
Yeah, the question is for the Chinese American's who've been living here a long time do they prefer Chinese American food, Chinese food or perhaps some combination of the two?
[quiet background noise]
It's the same for any immigrant group; they like the food from their own countries.
So yes, as I am sure everyone will attest to back home, they cook whatever it is that they're used to.
So as children of immigrants, I'm a first generation kid, I ate what my parents ate.
But that changed after a while because there is only so much that working parents can do for a kid
and I ate like anyone else growing up I had hot dogs, hamburgers and my parents learned.
But my Grandfather, who was born in the Qing dynasty, I remember him taking me to have my first McDonald's.
You know it's any other immigrant's story there is no, the line is pretty much the same, where ever your folks are from they will prefer to eat home cooking.
Yeah, I mean so my parents are both from Hong Kong and when I was a kid,
you know like, I grew up in the Bay Area and so there were Chinese restaurants like down the street, you know 5 minute drive away,
but sometimes it'd be like Thursday night and they'd be like, "We're gonna get Hong Kong food!" and then we'd drive for like an hour and 45 minutes.
When I was a kid I was like, "Why we driving so far?" right?
Now after I've spent some time living in China, I'm like, "That's why."
Because it's so much better and they would like, miss it and um yeah it's like sometimes you'll, I mean, same thing in Virginia and Maryland;
like sometimes you might come across like a Chinese restaurant or any other kind of Asian restaurant
like that's like really into [[??cuts]] like there's no way that you woulda just stumbled upon it
and then you see it and then it's just like filled with people
and it's like how do you, like you know, that's kinda like the word of mouth
and its like the folks who grew up eating really authentic Asian food when they find a spot that kinda fits it as closely as they can, like they'll gravitate towards it, tell all their homies
yeah know like, it's like we've been doing Yelp before the internet. So --
[Audience Laughter]
Yes, in the back.
James Deutsch: Yeah, the question is if I want to order an authentic Chinese dish, what might you recommend?--As authentically Chinese.
Cedric Yeh: I think the best way to say that is-- as Adriel mentioned, there are centers if--I try to stay away from this authenticity question because I think that's more of a question of cuisine and that's fine. If you are looking for that.
Cedric Yeh: My work and my studies have taken me towards like how the story progresses in terms of how the menu can be used as a timeline as we've mentioned earlier but, to answer your question, you would want to go to one of the centers where there are more new immigrants.
Cedric Yeh: So, their restaurants will be catering, like the early Chinese immigrants in the 1850s, to the community. So, if you go there and you order off the menu there, there is a chance that it's still is the menu that caters mainly to the people in the community and hasn't yet been experienced or adapted as a business, Adriel has also mentioned, to the takes of their cus- a wider range of customers.
Cedric Yeh: You probably wont get that in a regular restaurant. Most average restaurants are just going to have the menus that do well and asking won't really change anything. I would give you one cautionary tale. I had a friend of mine who did like to explore and enjoy and they went into a Chinese restaurant, it was down home.
Cedric Yeh: It had nothing but Chinese everywhere and they were like, 'This is where I want to be!' and they pointed at one item and they pointed at another and the waiter looked at them and said, 'Are you sure?' and they said, 'Come on, bring it on. I am not concerned.'
Cedric Yeh: They said, 'Look really, I am just asking. Really?' They're like, 'I am not afraid. I'm going to enjoy this, you just watch.' He came back with the same dish, they were on different parts of the menu. So, you know, just be cautious.
Adriel Luis: Yeah but, I mean, you'll find some restaurants where there is like the English menu and if you recognize everything on there, then you know you got like the menu for like the non-Chinese people and then like usually you'll see like all these Chinese characters like all over the wall.
Adriel Luis: Right? Like, if you point at something like that, there is probably a lot of dishes that- it's not necessarily that it's something that you find disgusting or anything but, it's something that often times these restaurant owners they, especially if they are catering towards Americans as well as Chinese customers, they'll have two separate menus and then they'll kind of like, based out of their own reference be like, 'Ok, you know,I'll put in English the things that I'm gonna assume that, you know, Americans are gonna want to eat and then I'm not even going to even bother translating the things that I'm gonna assume that their not gonna want to eat
Adriel Luis: but if you're interested in trying it and you're not worried about, you know like, you know, ending up with an unconventional body part which is typically what I prefer, I mean.  I know that if you do find something that is like kind of translated, like they were like having a really rough time trying to translate in English, that is probably more on the side of something that you'll get, you know, that a Chinese customer would order because, you know, like, they had like a really difficult time trying to explain it in English while still making it sound appetizing.
Adriel Luis: You could also just like order the english- the english translated item that sounds the most disgusting. It is probably the most delicious thing on the menu. And I will say yeah. Like, you know, everybody kind of knows the rule of like, if you go to a Chinese restaurant and you don't see any Chinese people eating there then you probably shouldn't eat there either.
Adriel Luis: Sometimes like, my fiancee and I will like, try a restaurant and then we will see people like, look through the window and see us and come in and like, eat because they saw us and we are like, 'No no no, we're just trying this. It's actually not that good.' So, ehh.
Cedric Yeh: Once again, I apologize to any Chinese restaurants we might be taking business away. I would like to point out once again, that you know, for my take it's food that we- it didn't get to 50,000 restaurants because we were looking for the one real one. We do have real ones, they're everywhere. All of those are real.
Cedric Yeh: There's no- like, you know, if you want to find something that has more um, authentic is such a loaded word. If you want to look for that, fine, but the Chinese restaurants that dot our landscape, they're perfectly fine, I enjoyed them growing up as much as I liked a Big Mac. So, you know, beef and broccoli is how my mom got me to eat vegetables.
Cedric Yeh: You know, and as Adriel said that's not, you can't find broccoli, they don't make that in China but I loved it so you know and keep on going, it's good stuff.
James Deutsch: Yes, question here.
James Deutsch: Yeah, her comment is that as a Chinese student when she goes to Chinese restaurants, she will tell the owner, you know, 'I want the food prepared in the Chinese way.'
James Deutsch: Yes, sir?
Audience Member: I was wondering if there was any sort of, like back--because you say the Chinese restaurants here started as like more homeland mainly in China. But how deep was that entrepreneurial spirit? I wonder if like there was any sort of backlash like, 'Oh, now you're cooking for Americans, you've sold out.' Was any of that like backlash? Or was that entrepreneurial spirit like so deep that they're like 'Oh no, go for it.'
James Deutsch: Yeah, the question is whether there was a backlash to the Chinese entrepreneurs creating Chinese restaurants.
Cedric Yeh: Um, I don't know, that's another one of those in that moment when they were first try-- But as Adriel was explaining and I mentioned briefly, that exclusionary period where Chinese restaurants really took hold was-- is hard to explain.
Cedric Yeh: It was devastating. Think about it. I mean, you all have your immigration stories. You know where your parents came from. You know that there's a background, there's a community they came from. Ah, Northern Europe, Africa, wherever it might be, Asia.
Cedric Yeh: But just imagine if they said 'no more.' Alright so that meant, in theory, those that were in this country were go-- they were di--
Cedric Yeh: Most of the ones who migrated here were men. They came here for work. You would eventually, after a generation or two, just, um, evaporate. There wasn't any-- no one else coming in.
Cedric Yeh: There was a trickle of high level, like, merchants and diplomats and things like that-- businessmen. But, your communities were almost all men, they were ostricized to begin with, now you have a law in place that says 'and if this is the one business you can do, you will do whatever it takes to stay open, to serve' and there's just this amazing- like I'm amazed at what was going on.
Cedric Yeh: But, Adriel mentioned chop suey. Chop suey was-- I like to think of it as a savior. Other scholars-- there's no real, um, documentation. But the rise of chop suey was right in the heart of that exclusionary period.
Cedric Yeh: Americans loved chop suey. There was an explosion of chop-chop houses, this is what they called them. They went from, say, New York as an example. The census-- it showed restaurants in, uh, the late 1890s, 1900s, there were maybe 40 Chinese restaurants.
Cedric Yeh: By the end-- the beginning of the 1900s, there were 200. Alright? And because people just absolutely had to have this. And it might have saved the community. It gave them an opportunity to survive when there really wasn't a lot of options.
Cedric Yeh: But, you know, if you're just trying to stay alive, I don't think anybody would be saying 'Why are you serving that? That's not a--" You know, he's just glad that he's making a buck.
Speaker 1: Yeah and I think also, I mean, also a lot of the entrepreneurs were sending money back to China, and so I don't think people in China were having a problem with that.
Uh, and I think also, I mean, the, the food, American Chinese food, uh, in many ways is just like so, so different from the types of cuisine that you would get in different parts of China that it didn't, it almost doesn't really feel like a bastardization.
And I think one of the things to clarify is like, you know, the first time I went to China, I was like concerned, I was like, China's so big and if it's all Chinese restaurants how do they all cook the same thing?
And I realized, you know like, China's such a huge country with so many regions and so there's not just like, there's no restaurant really that is like Chinese food.
You know you have Yunnan food, you have Sichuan food, you have Funan food, you have Hong Kong food, you have [[Mikou?]] food, you have Taiwanese food, and so, um, you know there, there is like a huge variety of restaurants.
You can go into a mall and there will be a food court of like 20 restaurants and they'll all serve different things even though they're all different kinds of Chinese food.
And so, when you come out here, especially the restaurants that are catering towards Americans, uh, they're just still trying to wrap their heads around Chinese being you know like, one kind of Asian right, and so, you know, it's a long shot to be like, "Nah, nah we're this kind of Chinese."
And so as a result, I think that this kind of amalgamated Chinese food is something that like, no one particular region, I think, would feel personally offended about. I mean, that's an assumption on my hand.
I think as a result you kind of get- It almost feels like a top 40 sometimes when you look at the menu. You've got, like, Mongolian beef, right. You've got, like, Hunan shrimp. You've got all these food items that are named after one region as if in Mongolia all they eat is Mongolian beef.
And so, I think that, again, it was-- during the time, it's just like the validation. When you're in a period where there's just so much xenophobia, and then you actually start getting customers from the communities that have been ostracizing you, like that validation I think is enough to kind of override any feeling of people are trying to water down my culture.
Speaker 1: Other questions? Yes, sir?
Speaker 2: I was in New Mexico a couple of weeks ago and, uh, I stopped in a-- I stayed in a hotel, you know, and I, stayed in a hotel.
It was owned by some Chinese people and the free breakfast-- so for the breakfast it was, well, it wasn't lunch, y'know. It was just cereal and some milk and [[?]].
And then they had some strange-looking pastries, it was sort of like spirals, in a hard little encasement sort of thing, and it kind of made me wonder what what is the uh, in Chinese cuisine, is there a breakfast tradition?
Or [[?]] So, uh, what is the Chinese tradition for breakfast?
Speaker 1: Yea the question is uh, based on his experience at a a hotel in Mexico, wondering about what might be a traditional Chinese breakfast?
]
Speaker 3: It's a lot different, sort of, than here, although the oatmeal, it's not oatmeal, just watery rice, now that could be, you would be like, "hey, that's like oatmeal!" But yes, they have pastries, it's usually, the places in China that I went too, it's usually kind of salty.
They'll be snacks, not snacks, little dishes of salted vegetables, maybe some peanuts, pickles, pickled vegetables, things like that, a version of oatmeal [[?]] rice, some pastries.
And I'm trying to remember, err, you've been there more recently, did you have a lot of breakfast?
Speaker 4: Yeah, it'll usually be kinda greasy, really greasy stuff. Uh, I mean, especially from Hong Kong, you have like, if you ever, you know like you see the Congee, which is like the rice porridge. And then they'll serve it with like, they usually call it, in America they'll call it like "fried Chinese donut." It's like, quite delicious 'cuz it's fried dough, but, have you seen Mulan? You've seen Mulan. I've seen Mulan, right. And uh, like there's that seen where like the Eddie Murphy dragon is like, being like, "Breakfast time, Mulan!" And then this like, a bowl of rice with like eggs and bacon. It's like, that's not what they eat in China. So, yeah, I mean, I think pastries is something that Chinese folks, particularly, I mean definitely, in Hong Kong, because of the European influence, like, they definitely take it on. So, you have like these egg custard tarts, you know Chinese wedding cake is like, you see this influence from Western culture, Parisian culture, things like that. But pastries themselves have not necessarily been something that had been customarily a breakfast dish. It will typically be pretty greasy and salty and kind of heavy because when you think about, like,you know, rural China, you got to eat something pretty heavy cause you have to go out and, like, work in the fields for a really long time.
Speaker 2: Well unfortunately our time has come to a close, but I'd like maybe a nice round of applause for Adria Lewis and Cedric Yeh, talking about sweet and sour Chinese food in America. Don't go away because coming up is a very exciting session actually speaking of restaurants. This particular session is actually being sponsored by Busboys and Poets and the topic and key thing with our diaspora day theme is African and Asian spoken word.
I'd also like to call your attention that this evening at 6pm in the Moonrise pavilion right behind you should be a very exciting concert with performers Abigail Washburn and the Shanghai Restoration Project, but, please stay tuned for African, Asian diaspora spoken word and I'll turn the microphone over to my co-curator Siu-Jin Kim.
Thank you again to Jim, Cedric and Adriel. Fantastic session. And as Jim said, we're gonna continue the theme of diaspora now.